                                           LAWS OF MOTION
Newton's laws of motion are three physical laws that, together, laid the foundation for classical mechanics. They describe the 
relationship between a body and the forces acting upon it, and its motion in response to those forces. More precisely, the first law
 defines the force qualitatively, the second law offers a quantitative measure of the force, and the third asserts that a single isolated
 force doesn't exist. These three laws have been expressed in several ways, over nearly three centuries,[1] and can be summarised as follows:

First law:	In an inertial frame of reference, an object either remains at rest or continues to move at a constant velocity, 
unless acted upon by a force.
Second law:	In an inertial frame of reference, the vector sum of the forces F on an object is equal to the mass m of that object
multiplied by the acceleration a of the object: F = ma. (It is assumed here that the mass m is constant – see below.)
Third law:	When one body exerts a force on a second body, the second body simultaneously exerts a force equal in magnitude and opposite
in direction on the first body.

Newton's first law
The first law states that if the net force (the vector sum of all forces acting on an object) is zero, then the velocity of the object is constant.
 Velocity is a vector quantity which expresses both the object's speed and the direction of its motion; therefore, the statement that the object's
 velocity is constant is a statement that both its speed and the direction of its motion are constant.

The first law can be stated mathematically when the mass is a non-zero constant, as,
          net F=0 <=> dv/dt = 0
Consequently,

An object that is at rest will stay at rest unless a force acts upon it.
An object that is in motion will not change its velocity unless a force acts upon it.
This is known as uniform motion. An object continues to do whatever it happens to be doing unless a force is exerted upon it.
If it is at rest, it continues in a state of rest (demonstrated when a tablecloth is skilfully whipped from under dishes on a 
tabletop and the dishes remain in their initial state of rest). If an object is moving, it continues to move without turning or changing
its speed. This is evident in space probes that continuously move in outer space. Changes in motion must be imposed against the tendency 
of an object to retain its state of motion. In the absence of net forces, a moving object tends to move along a straight line path indefinitely.

Newton placed the first law of motion to establish frames of reference for which the other laws are applicable. The first law of motion postulates
the existence of at least one frame of reference called a Newtonian or inertial reference frame, relative to which the motion of a particle not 
subject to forces is a straight line at a constant speed. Newton's first law is often referred to as the law of inertia. 
Thus, a condition necessary for the uniform motion of a particle relative to an inertial reference frame is that the total net force acting 
on it is zero. In this sense, the first law can be restated as:

In every material universe, the motion of a particle in a preferential reference frame F is determined by the action of forces whose total 
vanished for all times when and only when the velocity of the particle is constant in F. That is, a particle initially at rest or in uniform 
motion in the preferential frame F continues in that state unless compelled by forces to change it.

Newton's first and second laws are valid only in an inertial reference frame. Any reference frame that is in uniform motion with respect to an 
inertial frame is also an inertial frame, i.e. Galilean invariance or the principle of Newtonian relativity.

Newton's second law
The second law states that the rate of change of momentum of a body is directly proportional to the force applied, and this change in momentum
takes place in the direction of the applied force.
          F=dp/dt=d(mv)/dt
The second law can also be stated in terms of an object's acceleration. Since Newton's second law is valid only for constant-mass systems,can 
be taken outside the differentiation operator by the constant factor rule in differentiation. Thus,
          F=ma

Newton's third law
The third law states that all forces between two objects exist in equal magnitude and opposite direction: if one object A exerts a force FA 
on a second object B, then B simultaneously exerts a force FB on A, and the two forces are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction: 
FA = -FB. The third law means that all forces are interactions between different bodies,[25][26] or different regions within one body, 
and thus that there is no such thing as a force that is not accompanied by an equal and opposite force. In some situations, the magnitude and 
direction of the forces are determined entirely by one of the two bodies, say Body A; the force exerted by Body A on Body B is called the "action", 
and the force exerted by Body B on Body A is called the "reaction". This law is sometimes referred to as the action-reaction law, with FA called 
the "action" and FB the "reaction". In other situations the magnitude and directions of the forces are determined jointly by both bodies and it isn't 
necessary to identify one force as the "action" and the other as the "reaction". The action and the reaction are simultaneous, and it does not matter 
which is called the action and which is called reaction; both forces are part of a single interaction, and neither force exists without the other.

The two forces in Newton's third law are of the same type (e.g., if the road exerts a forward frictional force on an accelerating car's tires, then 
it is also a frictional force that Newton's third law predicts for the tires pushing backward on the road).

From a conceptual standpoint, Newton's third law is seen when a person walks: they push against the floor, and the floor pushes against the person. 
Similarly, the tires of a car push against the road while the road pushes back on the tires-the tires and road simultaneously push against each 
other. In swimming, a person interacts with the water, pushing the water backward, while the water simultaneously pushes the person forward—both 
the person and the water push against each other. The reaction forces account for the motion in these examples. These forces depend on friction; 
a person or car on ice, for example, may be unable to exert the action force to produce the needed reaction force.

